A Beginner’s Guide
DAY 1: 
Memorizing The Keys
You need to memorize exactly one set of 12 keys
 
Looking at the white keys, the musical alphabet starts at A and continues through G. After G, letters start back at A.
 
C is a very easily identifiable note when you look at your keys - just to the left of the cluster of two black keys.

Exercise 1:
Play a white key, at random, on command.
Practice this until you can keep up with the fastest version of the exercise.

DAY 2:
Introduction to Major Chords
 
 
For our purposes, a chord is simply multiple notes that are played at the same time. Typically there are three notes in a chord, which is why they can also be called “triads.”
Today we are going to focus on the most popular type of chord: major chords. Major chords are so common that you’re unlikely to find any songs without them! They are the brighter, more straightforward-sounding chords and have a happy or “lighter” tone.

C-Major Chord
Our first chord example is C major. There are three notes in this chord.
Notes of the C-major chord: C, E, G.
Which fingers should you use to play chords? You have several options:
 
Option three (thumb, index finger, middle finger) allows us the most versatility when we learn more advanced concepts in future lessons. I strongly encourage you to make option three work if you can. But if you have very small hands or reduced mobility then you can certainly use one of the other two options.

F-Major Chord
Now that you have found the fingering you feel is the best fit for you, our next chord example is F major. 
Notes of the F-major chord: F, A, C.
 

G-Major 
Our next chord example is G major. 
Notes of the G-major chord: G, B, D.
 

How to strike the keys
It’s important to press with the tips of your finger, rather than the pads of your fingers.
 

Chord Notation and Major Chords
 

Chord Progressions
Since songs have more than one chord in them, every time you play a song you will be playing a sequence of chords. Most of the time, there will be separate sequences that repeat for different parts of the song. Every sequence is called a “chord progression.” So if you play the three chords we learned today in a sequence, you have played a chord progression!

Exercise 2.1:
You will hear my voice calling out either “C major,” “F major,” or “G major” in a random order. Play each chord after you hear its name. Practice this until you can keep up with the fastest version of the exercise.

Exercise 2.2:
A new, fun, and exciting way to practice: backing tracks. A backing track is a version of the song featuring other musical instruments that is designed for you to play along with. It will also show you which chords to play and when. In this exeircise, you will play along with the first backing track I have for you.
Slow
 
Medium 
 
Fast 
 
Exercise 2.3:
Play along with the second backing track. This one also uses only the three chords we have learned so far.
Medium
 
Fast
 

Exercise 2.4:
In this exercise, you will play along with the “12-Bar Blues” backing track. 12-Bar Blues is a very popular chord progression and has a bluesy, jazzy feel to it.
Medium 
 
Fast
 

Exercise 2.5:
Watch “The 4-Chord Song” by The Axis of Awesome. This is a fun video that will really show you the power of chords, and we’ll discuss it later.
https://youtu.be/5pidokakU4I

DAY 3:
Introduction to Minor Chords
We learned how to play major chords and focused on three major chords to practice: C, F, and G.
There are actually a lot of songs that use that exact chord progression, particularly among the “golden oldies”! Songs from artists such as Chuck Berry (“Johnny B. Good”) and The Beatles (“Twist and Shout,” “Love Me Do”) are great examples of this.
In the 1960s and 70s, popular music began to add more minor chords to their chord progressions. Minor chords sound moodier or more emotional than major chords, so adding them in allows for more expressiveness and variation in tone.
But before we try to play our first minor chords, we need to learn one more neat fact about the major chords.

Forming any Major Chord
 
To use the 4-3 formula, you need to know which major chord you are supposed to play. Then you will follow these steps:
• Place your thumb on the “root note,” aka the note the chord is named after.
• Count four notes to the right (including the black keys) and place your next finger there.
• Count three more notes to the right (still including the black keys) and place your next finger there.
• Press all three notes together, and you have played a major chord!
 

Forming any Minor Chord
 
As with the major chords, to use the 3-4 formula you need to know which minor chord you are supposed to play. Then follow these steps:
• Place your thumb on the “root note,” aka the note the chord is named after.
• Count three notes to the right (including the black keys), and place your next finger there.
• Count four more notes to the right (including the black keys), and place your next finger there.
• Press all three notes together, and you have played a minor chord!

D-Minor Chord
Our first minor chord example is D minor. 
Notes of the D-Minor chord: D, F, A.
Let’s try our 3-4 minor chord formula with a D-minor chord.
• Place your thumb on the “root note,” aka the note the chord is named after. For our D-minor chord, the root note is D.
• Count three notes to the right (this will be the F key), and place your next finger there.
• Count four more notes to the right (this will be the A key), and place your next finger there.
• Press all three notes together, and you have played a D-minor chord!
 

E-Minor Chord
Our next chord example is E minor. 
Notes of the E-minor chord: E, G, B.
 

A-Minor Chord
Our next chord example is A minor. 
Notes of the A-minor chord: A, C, E.
 

More About Chord Notation
We learned that a major chord can commonly be written as just a capital letter. Minor chords are different: they will always be written with either “minor” or a lowercase “m” following the name of the root chord.
So for example, a D-major chord is written as “D.” The D-minor chord is written as “Dm.” A C-major chord is written as “C.” The C-minor chord is written as “Cm.”
Here is an example chord chart from part of “House of the Rising Sun” by The Animals:
 
We haven’t learned every chord in the example above, but I’m showing you this image so you can see the difference in the way major and minor chords are denoted on chord charts.

The 4-Chord Song
An Australian band called Axis of Awesome figured out that there’s a huge list of popular songs that use exactly the same chord progression. The band made a video where they play that same chord progression over and over again while singing a mashup of lyrics from the various songs.
In the last exercise from the previous lesson, I asked you to watch a video of them performing that “song.”
Now that you’ve seen it, hopefully you are beginning to recognize how powerful chords can be. With the same four chords, they were able to play over 36 super-popular songs.
I’ll share with you what those four chords are, so you can begin to do the same: they are C major, G major, A minor, and F major. Yep— you’ve already learned all four of those!
 

Exercise 3.1:
You will hear my voice calling out either “D minor,” “E minor,” or “A minor” in a random order. Play each chord after you hear its name. Practice this until you can keep up with the fastest version of the exercise.

Exercise 3.2:
Use the audio exercise to practice all six chords we have learned to this point.
Medium 
 
Fast
 

Exercise 3.3:
Play along with the backing track, which includes all six chords we have learned at this point.
Slow
 
Medium
 
Fast
 

Exercise 3.4:
Play along with the backing track, which is essentially “The 4-Chord Song.”
Medium
 
Fast
 

DAY 4:
Adding The Left Hand
 

The Role of Each Hand
So far you have only been playing with your right hand, so it’s time to bring in the left. But first, let’s look at what role each of your hands will play with my approach to piano.
I will never tell you to play chords with your left hand. That’s because chords or triads played on the left-most portion of your keyboard sound “muddy.” Bad. Just not good! Meanwhile, when played near the middle or on the right side of your keyboard, they sound great! So you are going to be keeping all your chords near the center and/or on the right, and you will always play them with your right hand.
Meanwhile, your left hand is going to bring in bass notes that will enhance what you play with your right hand. Most of the time, you will play two bass notes with your left hand, mirroring the root note of the main chord. So for example, if you are playing a C chord with your right hand, your left hand can play two C notes (this is not considered a chord).
 

Adding in the Left Hand
To add the left hand to what we’ve already learned, let’s practice with the C-major chord first. Play the C-major chord with your right hand, using our 4-3 formula. And now, at the same time, play two C keys with your left hand. The notes you are playing should look like this:
 
Now you can try this with other chords. Let’s look at the F-major chord. With your right hand, play the F-major chord; with your left hand, play two F keys.
 
Then, try it with a G-major chord.
 
There is no difference in how we handle the left hand with minor chords and other more advanced chord types. Eventually we’ll learn more advanced left-hand techniques, but for now, let’s focus on playing those two bass notes on the left to go along with each chord on the right.
While your left pinky and thumb are playing the two bass notes, leave your middle three left fingers alone for now: you can rest them gently on the keys or keep them slightly lifted, it’s up to you.

If You’re Struggling...
You may feel like there are too many things happening at once, or feel unsure of where to look now that both hands are playing at the same time. Please trust me when I say that what seems difficult right now will become second nature to you with a bit more practice.
If you are struggling with getting all your fingers in the right place or with looking at all of them at the same time, try to focus on getting the root notes down first and letting the other fingers follow. You can do this!

Exercise 4.1:
You will hear my voice calling out all six chords we have learnt in a random order. While adding the left hand, play each chord after you hear its name. Practice this until you can keep up with the fastest version of the exercise.

Exercise 4.2:
Play along with the backing track, which includes all six chords we have learned at this point, and add in the left hand. (See Ex3.3)

Exercise 4.3:
Play along with the backing track (“The 4-Chord Song”) like you did on Day 3, but this time add in the left hand. Play each chord one time before playing the next chord. (See Ex3.4)

Exercise 4.4:
Play along with the backing track from exercise 4.3 again, but this time play each chord two times before moving on to the next chord. So, for example, when the backing track shows C, you should play the C-major chord twice before the track moves to G. Make sure the chords are all evenly spaced and that you keep the beat.
Slow
 
For Medium and Fast, (See Ex3.4)

Exercise 4.5:
Play along with the backing track from exercise 4.3 again, but this time play each chord four times before moving on to the next chord.

Exercise 4.6:
Repeat the previous exercise, but this time do not use the backing track. Practice the “4-Chord Song” chord progression, playing each chord four times before moving on to the next chord. EXTREMELY IMPORTANT: the timing between all the chords should be the same. For example, the time between playing a C-major chord and another C-major chord should be the same as the time between playing a C-major chord and a G-major chord. It is critical we get this timing down from the start. Play as slowly as you need to in order to get the correcting timing.

DAY 5:
Hand Coordination and Rhythm 
Practicing Without the Keys
This is going to be (quite literally) a VERY hands-on lesson. I want you to stretch your hands open in front of you and then begin patting them onto something that is not your keyboard. Any flat surface, like a tabletop or the solid top of your piano, should work great.
Begin counting an even 1-2-3-4 over and over as you pat the surface with both hands. There should be one to two seconds per pat. Each pat is what we call a “beat.” Continue until your rhythm is comfortable and consistent.
Next, let’s alternate hands. Pat your left hand on the 1 and the 3 and your right hand on the 2 and the 4, keeping your beat consistent.
Once you’re comfortable with that, switch it up. Continue alternating your hands, but this time start with your right hand. So now your right hand will pat on the 1 and the 3 and your left hand will pat on the 2 and the 4.
Now we’re going to make it even more challenging. Pat your left hand on all four beats, but your right hand just on the 2 and the 4. Once you have that down, continue with your left hand, but pat your right hand on the 1 and the 3. And then finally, still doing the same thing with your left hand, pat your right hand on the 1, the 3, and the 4.
See how you’re starting to do something different with your right hand and your left?
Next, let’s repeat those last few patterns, but this time pat your right hand on all four beats and vary your left hand.

Applying It to the Keys
Finally, you’re going to repeat this whole sequence but on your keys! Find a C-major chord, using both your right and left hands, and repeat the same series of instructions, but instead of patting a surface, actually play the keys!

Exercise 5.1:
Using the backing track, play your left hand on every beat and your right hand on just the 2 and the 4. (See Ex3.4)

Exercise 5.2:
Use the backing track, but this time you choose the pattern. Select which beats you’ll play with your left hand and which beats you’ll play with your right hand.

Exercise 5.3:
Use the backing track, but this time play your left hand on the 1 and the 4 and your right hand on the 1 and the 3. This is a fun pattern, and I want you to get really comfortable with it.

Exercise 5.4:
Repeat the pattern from exercise 5.3, but this time without the backing track. Really focus on consistent timing and on not sneaking in any extra time while changing to a new chord.

Additional Formulas To Form Any Chord, Numbers of Half Steps between each note of the Chord
 
Now you know how to play all the Major and minor chords on the piano and can play many simple pop songs… Eg. Try “See You Again” by Wiz Khalifa & Charlie Puth
Gmin -> Bb maj -> Eb maj -> Bb maj

DAY 6:
Chord Progressions & How to Chart a Song
Listen to the bass notes
I discovered over time that one of the big tricks is learning what NOT to listen to. Take any given song and you might have drums, bass, piano, acoustic guitar, electric guitar, lead vocals, and harmony vocals. So many things going on at once. Where do you start? 
Well, listen to the bass notes(lowest notes). The bass note is typically the foundation of everything else you hear. Learn to block out everything else besides the bass note, then add a little music theory, and you’ll have yourself a recipe to impress some friends.

Learn about Chord Groups (Diatonic)
I told you before how important bass notes are. They can give a lot of information away about what is going on in a song. If you know what key you are in, and can figure out the bass note, the 90% of the time you’ll be able to know what chord is being played.
So what exactly is a diatonic chord? Each key signature has a group of chords that are naturally created by it. For example, the key of “C” has these diatonic chords:
C, Dm, Em, F, G, Am, Bdim.
Notice the combination (order): Major, minor, minor, Major, Major, minor, and diminished. No matter what major key you are on you will always get the same combination.
So let’s go back to listening to the bass note. Say you know you are in the key of “C”, and you hear a bass note that turns out to be “C”. Chances are you just heard a C Major chord. Maybe you heard an “E” bass note. Chances are you just heard an Em chord. 
This works 90% of the time. There are a few exceptions… but learn the 90% and the other 10% will be easier to find later.

Exercise 6.1:
Start memorizing your major scales diatonic chords. Also take time to add the combination of Major, minor, minor, Major, Major, minor, and diminished to them so that you get use to thinking about your diatonic chords.
 
Scale
A series of eight notes that begins and ends on the same note. Each note is designated a number from 1 through 8.
 
Major Scale
A series of whole steps(Whole Tone) with half steps(Semi-Tone) located at the 3-4 and 7-8 intervals of the scale. There is only one major scale order that applies to all 12 keys.
The half step formula for a major scale is: 
2 2 1 2 2 2 1
 
 

Exercise 6.2:
Plunk out major scales using only your brainpower to consistently produce a major scale starting on any note (black notes included).
DO NOT look at this book or follow any kind of reference. Don’t think about key signatures or any rote reflexes of playing-scales-gone-by. Don’t think about anything alpha. CONCENTRATE ONLY ON THE NUMERICAL ORDER! CONCENTRATE ON REPEATING THE PATTERN OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
You ear will tell you if you make a mistake but THIS IS NOT A HUNT AND PECK EXERCISE. This is a program-your-mind exercise.
Do not go on until you master, without error, playing a major scale starting anywhere. Again, this isn’t guesswork; it’s exact-work. Ingraining this numerical pattern is something your mind can really absorb and muse over.

Why Picking out a Major Scale is so Important
The above exercise removes all doubt that you are able to create a major scale starting anywhere on the keyboard from scratch. It is this numerical pattern that controls music and the reason why you must be able to do it flawlessly each time, every time.
Being able to do this is the basis for everything you count in music. It is the key to building chords, transposing and playing by ear.

Common Progressions
The other thing that is really helpful in charting songs is understanding common chords progressions. What this means is that there are certain combinations of chords that happen a lot together… and in a certain order. One thing that really helps with this is understanding Nashville Numbers. 
Once you start to recognize these patterns you’ll almost be able to predict many times what chord is going to come next. Eventually chord progressions start to become predictable in the same way. Next I’ll talk about Nashville Numbers so you can see how all keys are similar when you see them as numbers. 

Nashville Numbers (Number System)
What do these groups of chords have in common?
Key of C: C Am F G
Key of D: D Bm G A
Key of Eb: Eb Cm Ab Bb
Don't worry if you have no idea... but if you know the answer there is a good chance you have been playing music for a while!
The Answer: They are all this Nashville Number progression: 1, 6-, 4, 5
Why I’ll explain.
There are twelve different major scale patterns to learn. What if you only had to know one? I'm pleased to let you know of something amazing and it’s called Nashville Numbers. If you can train yourself to think in numbers then you will be able to pick songs out easier, chart faster, and be able to recognize chord progressions like a pro.
We spoke earlier about the "C" scale and diatonic chords. C Dm Em F G Am Bdim. Now let’s change that into numbers. Instead of "m' for minor we are going to use "-". 
1, 2-, 3-, 4, 5, 6-, 7dim. 
The 1 = C, 2- = Dm, 3- = Em… and so on.

Example:
If we had a song that the chords went C Em F G… then in numbers it would be 1 3- 4 5. Now let's say that the key of "C" is too low for the singer (diva... just kidding). 
Let's move the song up to the key of "D". The D scale is D E F# G A B C#. By using numbers you'll know to play D F#m G A. D = 1, F#m = 3-, G = 4, and A = 5. 
The important thing is to see what the numbers are telling you. You'll start to see those chord progression patterns in the numbers… and BOOM! charting just got a little easier.

Exercise 6.3:
Create a Chord Chart lyrics included for “See You Again” by Wiz Khalifa & Charlie Puth. You know the chords Gmin, Bb maj, Eb maj are used. Identify the KEY the song is in and list ALL its Diatonic Chords 

Exercise 6.4:
Create another Chord Chart lyrics included for “See You Again” by Wiz Khalifa & Charlie Puth, but, this time use the Number System to represent the chords.

It’s All Numbers
With numbers you can keep track of where you are; build new chords; transpose to another key; and chart chord progressions. With numbers you understand the symmetry of music. When you understand one key, you understand them all. This is a major part of the Play By Ear Discovery.

Music Theory Psychs Us Out.
From the outside looking in, let’s look at key signatures. We view keys with a lot of notation (sharps or flats) like individual mountains. Each key has its own unique fingering pattern on the keyboard (when playing scales). All keys are unique when it comes to fingering.

Why We Practice Scales
The true premise of practicing scales is to teach your hands to memorize the rote reflexes of fingering for each key. If you drill yourself long and hard enough, then maybe keys with a lot of notation won’t be so hard to play. You don’t have to refer back because your hands have a feel for the key from so much practice.
That’s assuming that you even practice scales. Most don’t. For them, the key signature experience is different. They shy away from keys with lots of sharps and flats because they perceive those keys as the most difficult, and they are right. To them, the more notation, the more they have to constantly refer back to the key signature to verify. Some who practice scales have the same issues. We do not know how to break free of the following mode.

Why We Don’t Have To Practice Them
No matter how much notation is shown on a key signature, it always reduces down to 8 notes in a generic, major scale order. When you view scales as numbers, key signatures become less something to “follow” and more something that just “identifies the key.”
“How can I remember all of those scales off the top of my head?” you ask. By knowing the major scale order of 8 notes you can figure out any sharp or flat for any key whenever you need to. That’s how it is when you play by ear. You must be able to figure things out when they come up and usually, it’s on the fly. That’s where the major scale ruler is used over and over again.
 
What about the notion that the more sharps and flats, the harder to play? Chord patterns in many of the most popular keys (some with a lot of notation) have fingering that is just as easy as the key of C. Many keys are not harder to play when you understand them. They’re just harder to follow when you don’t.

Quick Highlight Review
The major scale is the seed of music theory.
There is no sharp or flat when using numbers; only numbers wherever they might fall on the keyboard in order. Again, the 12:1 ratio reduction. All scales and keys are equal. This is your most major point of concentration; the symmetry of all keys.
Use just your mind to play the scale without regard to anything other than numerical order / Count out the whole and half steps of the scale.
Concentrate on numbers only and the relative whole step /half step order. When you can do this without error, you realize just how much you are in control. There is no guessing. This is top level control of this concept to be able to play a major scale anywhere, anytime.
Everything you do to control music depends on your ability to create a major scale from scratch.

The Science of Music
The Science of Music is based on what you have just read. If you can count to 8 and understand how, why and when you need to, that’s all you need. That deep kind of insight takes time to coalesce. That’s why reduction is the key.

DAY 7
Chord Foundations 
Basic Chords
Basic chords should be thought of as comprising three notes and taking their name from the bottom note (the root). The intervals between these three notes are varied to give the different basic chords required.
I think of there being four basic chords: major, minor, diminished, and augmented. These are dealt with in this lesson. The next lesson deals with notes added to chords to make up remaining chords.

Major Chords
(SYMBOLS: C)
To obtain the three notes of the chord of C major, first play the major scale of C as follows:
 
Counting from the bottom take the 1st, C; 3rd, E; 5th, G; and play the chord of C major:
 
The intervals are a major third and a major fifth between these notes which are taken from the major scale of C:
A major chord comprises the first, third, and fifth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3, 5

Minor Chords 
(SYMBOLS: Cm, C min)
To get a minor chord take any major chord and lower the middle note. This is called lowering the third. Thus to play C minor:
 
The interval between the first and third is altered from a major third to a minor third. As with C minor, all other minor chords can be similarly obtained from the corresponding major.
A minor chord comprises the first, lowered third, and fifth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3b, 5

Diminished Chords 
(SYMBOLS: C°, C dim)
To get a diminished chord, take any major chord and lower (diminish) the third and the fifth notes.
 
A diminished chord comprises the first, lowered third, and diminish fifth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3b, 5b

Augmented Chords
(SYMBOLS: C+, C aug)
To get an augmented chord, take any major chord and raise (augment) the fifth to get the augmented chord. Thus to play C augmented:
 
An augmented chord comprises the first, third, and raised fifth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3, 5#

SUMMARY
Think of there being four basic chords.
Each chord has three notes.
Each chord takes its name from the root.
We obtain the basic chords in all the different keys as follows:
major chords: play the first, third, and fifth notes of the major scale that runs from the root; e.g. C major:
 
minor chords: take the major chord then lower the third; e.g. C minor:
 
diminished chords: take the major chord then lower the third and diminish the fifth; e.g. C diminished:
 
augmented chords: take the major chord then raise the fifth; e.g. C augmented:
 

The Remaining Chords
All remaining chords are variations made to the basic chords and should be thought of as being made up of basic chords, with other notes being added to them.

The Sixth Chord
(SYMBOLS: C6, C sixth)
The note added in playing a sixth chord is the sixth note of the major scale that runs from, and takes its name from the root note of, the basic chord.
 
The sixth chord gives a very sweet sound, which is used very often in older popular songs, sometimes as the final chord.
A sixth chord comprises the first, third, fifth, and sixth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3, 5, 6

Minor chords with added sixths 
(SYMBOLS: Cm6, C min 6)
Again, as for all sixth chords, it should be remembered that the sixth note to be added is the sixth note from the scale of C major. Thus the chord of C minor sixth is
 
It should also be noted that in the symbol for this chord (C min 6 or Cm6), the minor (m, or min) refers to the basic chord and not the sixth. 
A minor sixth chord comprises the first, lowered third, fifth, and sixth notes of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3b, 5, 6

Diminished chords with sixths 
(Symbols: C°, C dim, C dim 7)
A word first about the symbols used for diminished chords. These are the same as for the basic chord of C diminished — this is because the sixth can be added to the diminished chord as required, and frequently is. 
The symbol C dim 7 describes the diminished basic chord with an added diminished seventh (double flatted seventh) — The diminished seventh is enharmonically equivalent to a major sixth — Bbb to A in this example of C dim 7. To play C diminished with an added sixth:
 
A diminished seventh chord comprises the first, lowered third, diminished fifth, and diminished seventh (sixth notes) of the major scale that takes its name from the bottom note (the root).
1, 3b, 5b, 7bb(6)

The Major Seventh Chord
(SYMBOL: C maj 7)
In the symbol for the major seventh chord, the "maj" refers to the note that is added. In effect it must do, because the symbol C, on its own, would stand for the chord of C major. The symbol is as it is to differentiate the major seventh chord from the seventh chord explained later.
For major seventh chords, the note added to the basic chord is the seventh note from the major scale that runs from the root of the chord.
1, 3, 5, 7
 
The major seventh note can ofcourse be added to the other basic chords, but only if more unusual harmonies are required and the symbols would be:
For C minor with added major seventh:
C min(maj 7)
1, 3b, 5, 7
For C diminished with added major seventh: 
C dim(maj 7), C°(maj 7)
1, 3b, 5b, 7
For C augmented with added major seventh: 
Caug(maj 7), C+5 (maj 7), C(maj 7)#5
1, 3, 5#, 7
But for each, the note added is the seventh note of the major scale running from the root.

The Seventh Chord 
(SYMBOLS: C7, C seventh)
The distinction between major seventh and seventh chords can be slightly confusing at first, apparently confounding the simple approach of adding notes to chords. It does not in fact break any basic rules, so long as it is clearly remembered that C seventh is the shorthand way of writing the chord of C major plus the lowered seventh note of the scale of C major.
This is made more logical by remembering that there is a chord called C major seventh which is made up of the basic chord of C major plus the note which is the major seventh note of the scale of C major.
Think then that the seventh means lowered seventh, as opposed to the major seventh, of the scale that runs from the root of the chord to be played.
 
By playing these chords, you will be able to hear the difference between the major seventh and the seventh. The latter has a distinctly off-key sound which is more "dominating" than the major seventh. The seventh chord is referred to in music theory as the dominant seventh, but for other reasons.
1, 3, 5, 7b

Minor chords with added sevenths (Symbols: Cm7, C min 7)
We have seen that in writing the symbol C major seventh, the major describes how the seventh is to be played. The symbol C seventh, then, denotes the chord of C major with a lowered seventh note. If we write C minor seventh, the word minor describes the basic chord because the symbol seventh of itself means a lowered seventh note.
Thus the chord C minor seventh is the chord of C minor plus the lowered seventh note of the major scale of C:
 
Sevenths (that means lowered sevenths!) can be added to the other basic chords:
To augmented chords (symbols: C7+5, C7#5, C aug 7), take the basic augmented chord and add the flattened seventh note of the scale that runs from the root. This chord is called an Augmented seventh chord.
1, 3, 5#, 7b
To diminished chords (symbols: Cø7 or simply Cø. Also can be represented as Cm7(♭5)), take the basic diminished chord and add the lowered seventh note of the scale that runs from the root. This chord is called a Half-diminished seventh chord.
1, 3b, 5b, 7b

The Ninth Chord 
(SYMBOLS: C9, C ninth)
To obtain a ninth chord, take the basic chord, major, minor, diminished, or augmented and add the ninth note of the major scale that runs from the root. Thus ninths with C basic chords are as follows, the ninth note added (D) being the ninth note o fa two octave scale o f C major:
 
Usually, the ninth is a combination chord taking in the seventh (i.e. the lowered seventh note) as well. In fact, the seventh can be added to ninth chords as required, even if not denoted by the chord symbol given. 
Sometimes the seventh is a specified addition as in the symbols:
 

REMAINING CHORDS
Virtually any notes can be added to the basic chords and this can be denoted by an appropriate shorthand chord symbol. This can be seen from the Symbol chart and from sheet or album music. The symbols used are self-descriptive, indicating the basic chord to be used and indicating the further note or amended further note to be added.
 

SUMMARY
Always keep the basic chords firmly in mind:
The major chord: first, third, and fifth notes of the major scale that starts on the root, e.g. C major:
 
The minor chord: take the major chord and lower the third, e.g. C minor:
 
The diminished chord: take the major chord and lower the third and the fifth, e.g. C diminished:
 
The augmented chord: take the major chord and raise the fifth, e.g. C augmented:
 
Then for other chords:
Sixths: to any of the basic chords add the sixth note of the major scale that starts on the root of the basic chord, e.g. C sixth:
 
Major sevenths: add the major seventh note from the major scale that runs from the root of the basic core, to which it is to be added, e.g. C major seventh: 
 
Sevenths: add the lowered seventh note from the major scale that runs from the root of the basic chord to which it is to be added, e.g. C seventh:
 
Remaining chords: add the specified notes from the major scale, or amend the specified notes to the basic or further chords, e.g. C seventh with suspended fourth:
 
This applies to whatever range of chords—the principle runs through all keys. It is therefore possible to work out all the chords in all keys on the piano without memorizing positions. Knowing how to arrive at the notes of the chords means that they can be played with the right or left hands in the treble or bass clefs.
 

DAY 8
Inversions; The Three Chord Trick; Transposing
The contents of this lesson flow naturally from the previous two and lead to the next one on 12 bar blues, which has been used to bring the various strands together.

INVERSIONS
All chords can be played with the notes that make them up arranged in a different order, i.e. "inverted". So the chord of C major using the notes C, E, and G (the first, third, and fifth notes of the scale of C major) could be played as:
 
It is very useful to be able to invert chords in this way, because it makes changing from chord to chord, in either left or right hand, much easier. When familiarity with the basic chords has reached the level of being able to remember what notes make up the chords, then you will be able to arrange them in the easiest order for playing the chords specified in a piece of music.
 
 
To jump ahead a little, but to show further that thinking in chords and inversions is useful, it is often effective when playing a piece of music to:
Play single notes (the roots of the required chords) with the left hand; these can be played as octave notes in unison as shown in the example below;
Make up the rest of the chord by playing, with the right hand, the melody note and below that melody note, the other notes of the chord.
So the chord of C seventh under a melody note of C could be played:
 

THE THREE CHORD TRICK
In any key, there are only three major chords that can be built up by using only the notes of that scale to give the constituent firsts, thirds, and fifths. 
This can be more readily understood by example.
Taking the key of C, the major scale is:
 
Using only the above notes as the firsts, thirds, and fifths of chords, we get the following chords:
 
The only major chords produced are C, F, and G, using strictly the notes that appear in the scale of C. Thus chords based on the I, IV, and V notes of the scale give the major chords of a key.
It is these three chords in any key (the I, IV, and V) that are the most common in all music, providing the surest har- monies to melodies. They are the three chords used as the basis for most 12 bar blues.
It can be seen, just as different keys merely alter the pitch of music not the basic harmonies, so F, Bb, and C as the I, IV, and V chords of the scale (key) of F correspond to C, F, and G as the I, IV, and V chords of the scale (key) of C.

TRANSPOSING
The three chord trick can be used in any key by taking the appropriate I, IV, and V chords.
This is in effect transposing chords from one key to another. The following table is an example of how to transpose the I, IV, and Vchords from one key to the corresponding chords of other keys. They are all major chords.
 
Reference should now be made to the Transposing chart below to see how to transpose any note or chord that appears in a piece of music written in a certain key, to the relevant note or chord required if the piece is to be played in a different key.
 

SUMMARY
Familiarity with the fundamental positions of basic and other chords enables inversions to be played. This makes changing from chord to chord easier and gives flexibility in harmonization. For example, the following inversions of the specified chords show how inversions can be used to help the chord progression lie under the hand and cut down the need to move around the keyboard:
 
Inversions are often used in jazz and, for example, the Block chord piano style of George Shearing is typified by the left hand playing, at its simplest, the octave of the melody note with the notes added in between forming a progression of chords being played in their inversions. Thus:
 
There are, in any key, three primary major chords based on the I, IV, and V notes of the scale. In all keys these three chords correspond to the same chords in other keys, and transposition between these chords in different keys is easy to understand. Further than this, it is fairly straightforward to transpose chords and notes to change the key of a piece of music.

DAY 9
12 Bar Blues
INTRODUCTION
Various strands can be brought together and practiced in 12 bar blues. We can use this well-known structure to illustrate:
Putting a series of chords together
Playing inversions of chords
Adding notes to chords to give different sounds 
Transposing
Developing rhythm and natural feel
The interplay between left and right hands
Variations around a chord sequence.
12 bar blues can be played fast or slow and, because of the "feel" that it has, lends itself to jazz, blues, rock'n roll, and pop songs. A lot of early songs were written in 12 bar blues form; boogie woogie is usually in 12 bar form. Endless fun can be had by extemporizing around the basic chords used.

WHAT IS A 12 BAR BLUES?
Basically, 12 bar blues is three chords in one key played in a set order for 12 bars.

The chords used
The three chords used are those based on the I, IV, and V notes o f the scale of the key in question.
 
It is thus relatively easy to pick the relevant three chords out of any key for 12 bar blues in that key.

Knowing then the primary chords to be used, it can be seen that 12 bar blues could be played on other basic chords
based on the same notes, or adding or amending notes to the basic chords used.
 
The order in which the three chords are played
Although at first sight the sequence seems rigid, it has a natural feel about it that sounds right and as a form it is much freer than it first appears. It gives infinite opportunities for improvisation.
12 bar blues means 12 bars (and using the key of C as our example) based on the three chords (I, IV, and V), played in the order shown below. Remember the same would apply to 12 bars in F, or G, or any other key.

NOTE The diagonal lines show that the same chord is to be played a further three times in each bar, to make four beats in all.

12 Bar Blues in C
 
Musically, this can be written out as shown below. You should play each chord for each beat in each bar and count accordingly. This will sound rather boring at first, but if you play it over and over, getting a little faster, you will soon be able to 'feel' when the change in chord should occur. Having thus got used to the sound of 12 bar blues, and no longer having to count so rigidly, it will become apparent that by varying tempos and playing notes from the chords and additional notes in runs or other frills, you can use 12 bar blues to create your own music.

Exercise 9.1:
You should practice the following by using the left hand to play octave notes held for four beats and the right hand to play the chords for each of the four beats in each bar:
 
 
Reference Exercise 2.4 for a 12 bar blues backing track

Exercise 9.2:
Using sixth chords
For slight variation, use the chords of C6, F6, and G6 and play as follows—in the left hand play the root note held for four beats and in the right hand, an inversion of the chords played for each of the four beats in the bar:
 
 

Exercise 9.3: 
Seventh heaven?
By far the most common chord in 12 bar blues is the seventh—remember that the seventh is the basic chord plus the lowered seventh note of the scale running from the root.
Try playing 12 bar blues using the chords of C7, F7, and G7, substituting the seventh chords in their inverted positions for the inverted sixths in the previous exercise.
Use the sevenths in one of their inverted positions for the right hand, and again play the root with the left hand:
 

Exercise 9.4:
Experiment with the rhythm and tempo
Now try playing 12 bar blues on sixths or sevenths in the rhythm that you feel—say,
playing slowly: two chords per bar with the right hand but keeping one note held for four beats in each bar with the left hand.
or playing fast: eight chords per bar with the right hand but keeping one note held for four beats in each bar with the left hand.

Exercise 9.5:
Try 12 bar blues in different keys:
F, using the chords
 
Or
 
G, using the chords
 
Or
 
And so on…
Vary the playing between left and right hands: play single notes with the left hand as outlined, or play chords with the left hand (2 or 4 in a bar) and play single notes from the chords with the right hand.


In time you will return to 12 bar blues to play boogie woogie, improvise to, play early songs, or play rock'n roll songs. It sometimes appears as 24 bars which is a version where each bar is played twice to make up the total of 24 bars in all.

SUMMARY
The primary chords in any key are the major chords based on the I, IV, and V notes of the particular scale. These are the most common chords in music. They are the chords used in 12 bar blues which is a set sequence of these three chords played for a total of 12 bars.
Knowing this, 12 bar blues can be played in any key taking the I, IV, and V chords. We can use this structure to increase familiarity with the basic chords and to achieve a certain rhythmic interplay between the hands. Further embellishments from later lessons can then be applied and in time your ability to use 12 bar blues will increase.

DAY 10
How To Work Out Melodies By Ear
To play any song by ear without sheet music or guessing, then you have to fully understand the…

3 Core Musical Elements 
In the most basic form, songs are made of these 3 things...
Melodies
Harmonies
Rhythm

Melodies are the main prominent lines that stand out the most when you are listening to a song, for example it is the musical notes that a vocalist sings with lyrics, or it can be a solo guitar part in an instrumental break, or it can even be instruments that take the main role in an orchestral arrangement.

Melodies are made of a combination of many different note distances. Some distances are the same, some distances are larger or smaller, and some distances can be higher or lower.
These distances are called “intervals”, my job is to teach you how to recognise by ear exactly “how much higher” or “how much lower” between each melody interval without guessing.

Did you know that in 98% of the pop songs you hear, the melodies are actually formed by making combinations of intervals on one of these 2 types of scales?
Major Scale 
Natural Minor Scale
You are familiar with Major scales, but the natural minor scale is the scale that most of you don’t know. 

Every Major scale has its relative minor scale! The understanding of the relationship between the two brings quite a bit of clarity to learning Major and minor scale patterns and sets groundwork for exploring the concept of modes.

The Relative Minor 
The relative minor is a minor scale that shares its key signature with a related major scale.
If you start with a major scale, the relative minor is the scale that begins on the sixth degree. It shares the same key signature, so you can build it using the same notes, just in a different order.
Here’s how it works using C major. Counting up the scale, the relative minor minor begins on scale degree six. In C major, that’s A. So the relative minor of C major is A minor.
 
Just like C major, the basic form of A minor contains no sharps or flats.

Circle of Fifths
 
The pure relative minor scale is called the natural minor, or the aeolian mode.

Why learn the relative minor?
Many musicians use the relative minor as a quick way of remembering the minor scales.
Of course, you can always learn them by heart or use the circle of fifths. But most find remembering a single set of keys easier than committing them all to memory.
But on top of that, the relative minor helps reinforce how so many structures in music theory are connected. Once you realize that major and minor scales aren’t too different, you can start playing with more advanced concepts like modes and unique scales.

So go ahead and get use to the sounds of these 2 scales by playing them on your piano because the melodies of practically every song is formed by different combinations of these scales but in different KEYS.
The “KEY” of a song is the specific Major or Natural Minor scale the melody and chords are formed on.

Example 
Have you heard of the song called
“In The Jungle” or “The Lion Sleeps Tonight”?
So this song called “In The Jungle” in the KEY of C Major goes like this:
CDE..D...EF..ED...C..DE..DCED...
And with the corresponding lyrics:
“In the jungle... the mighty... jungle... the...lion... sleeps tonight...”
 
Then after when you have tried that, if you play it in a different key of... lets say - the Key of D Major, check it out... it sounds the same –
DEF#..E...F#G..F#E...D..EF#..EDF#E...
(Go ahead and play this D Major version and compare it with the C Major version to hear the similarities)

This process is transposition: the shifting of a melody, a harmonic progression or an entire musical piece to another key, while maintaining the same tone structure, I.e. the same succession of whole tones and semi tones and remaining melodic intervals.
Transposing Charts for Reference
 
And even for Ab Major, check it out...it still sounds the same –
AbBbC..Bb...CDb..CBb...Ab..BbC..BbAbCBb..
The reason behind this is because even though different Major and natural minor scales have different notes, the intervals between the 1st to the 2nd note, the 2nd to the 3rd, the 3rd to the 4th etc... ALWAYS follow the SAME formula.

Recall The ONE Formula For ALL Major Scales And Minor Scales...
 
(Where the numbers stand for the number of half steps/ semitones to the next note)

Now using the formula check out C Major and Ab Major Scale played back to back. Both sounds the same right?
You can sing “Do re mi fa so la ti do” perfectly to both of them right?
This is one of the tricks which explain relative pitch, solfege and transposition, and those things that are more advanced concepts that comes later. 
Anyway, let’s move on...
 
Now, the same thing goes for all natural minor scales... 
 
And using the formula if you play A natural minor and F natural minor back to back, you WILL also hear that they sound the same but is only in a different key.
This covers the slim basics of relative pitch where all melodies based on scales sound the same despite the fact if they are played in different keys.

Exercise 10.1:
Now, let’s get your ear into work by applying these scales into the melodies of recent pop song hits.
Here Is Your First Test To See If You Have What It Takes To Play By Ear...
This following melody is in the key of C Major, play it and listen to how it sounds!
C E G A... G... C-D D C E...
(notes of this song is within this range as shown in the diagram below)
 
Do you know what this song is?
If you don’t, then add these lyrics with it –
“It’s been a long...day...with-out you my friend...”
Yes, this is the C Major version of the melody from Wiz Khalifa & Charlie Puth’s song called “See You Again”.

Guess what...?
You Have Just Played A Song By Ear In Your Head...
Why? Because your ear actually correctly recognized the melody of the song in a KEY that is actually NOT in the original key. 
How do you know if it is not in the correct key? You can either play the C Major version whilst simultaneously listening to the original and you’ll find that they both don’t match.

The original key of this song is Bb Major. Try it out –
Bb D F G...F...Bb-C C Bb D...
(notes of this song is within this range as shown in the diagram below)
 
Double check your ear by comparing this Bb Major version with the original YouTube song here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgKAFK5djSk

If You Have Passed Your First Test, Here Is Your Second Test...

Exercise 10.2:
Let’s try your ear with another song with a melody in A natural minor...
Play this –
DE... D D...CEE... EE... EE... DD...CD...ED...AC...
(notes of this song is within this range as shown in the diagram below)
 
Do you know what this song is?
If you don’t, then add these lyrics with it –
“Hello... it’s me... I was won-dering... if af-ter all...these years...you’d like... to meet...”
And yes... this is the A natural minor version of the melody from Adele’s massive hit song called “Hello”.

And guess what? Again...
You Have Just Played Another Song By Ear In Your Head...
Why? Again...because your ear actually correctly recognized the melody of the song in a KEY that is actually NOT in the original key.

The original key of this song is F natural minor... Try it out for yourself and test your ears –
Bb C... Bb Bb... Ab C C... C C... C C... Bb Bb... Ab Bb... C Bb... F Ab...
(notes of this song is within this range as shown in the diagram below)
 
Double check it by comparing this F natural minor version with the original YouTube song here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQHsXMglC9A
Awesome right?

If you have passed both these song tests, then you have what it takes for the first step to play a song by ear, that is – Recognizing Melodies Of A Song In Any Major Or Natural Minor Scale

DAY 11
Playing by Chords from Music
INTRODUCTION
The choice of sheet or album music to buy is yours entirely, but it should have chord svmbols written below or above the staves. There are some books available that give only the single note melody line and the chord symbols, and these are ideal.
Playing from music, using the chord approach gives greater flexibility than playing the "set arrangement. Particularly with pop music, the sheet music is sometimes a poor reflection of the sound created on recordings. Chords enable you to put your own interpretation to the music, or to experiment, in order to match the sound and rhythm that you have heard, or wish to achieve.
Having played a piece using chords, transposing can be easier—refer to the Transposing chart seen before.
Other examples of the freedom that playing by chords gives are that it becomes easier to "back" other instruments, or voice, and that once the chord pattern is established in your mind, improvisation possibilities present themselves more naturally.
In reading from sheet or album music, it will soon be realized that there are different ways of denoting a chord, and different symbols for the same chord will be met.
Reference should be made to the Chord symbol chart seen before if there is any doubt about what a particular chord symbol means.

Help with other difficulties encountered in written music (for example reading key signatures) will be found below 
 
 
 
Besides symbols for chords, or words and phrases indicating tempo and mood, others will be encountered which specify which sections of music are to be repeated or omitted. The most common ones are as follows:
 

THE METHOD
I suggest that the music and chord symbols be tackled in the following way:
First play the melody line with the right hand until you are familiar with the tune.
Then, separately, play the chord with the left hand. Where necessary, go back to basics to work out the chord.
To start with, do not feel that you have to play every chord in a bar or add all the notes given. You will be able to do that eventually, but aim now for simple harmonies, say, by playing only the first and third chords if four different chords are given in a bar. Once you become familiar with the piece and the chord changes, the further chords/notes can be added.
Then play the left and right hand together in a simple rhythm.
When you have the feel of the piece of music, vary the mixture so that it might be:
a. single notes in the left hand;
b. or inverted chords in the left hand;
c. or notes from the chords added to the right hand below the melody note;
d. or left and right hands playing chords with you singing the song.
Work on it until the rhythm, tempo, and sound satisfy you.

Progress may be a little slow at first, but as dexterity and familiarity with chords increase, it will become easier. Even to start with, it is far easier than reading all the "dots," and, without too much difficulty, you will be playing the pieces all the way through. Because they will be tunes/songs that you like, you will be able to practice them with some sort of end product in mind, and each time through will be easier than the last.

PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATIONS
I have chosen a few bars from several songs to illustrate the basic approach that should be adopted in playing from music using chords. You can try each example, or merely pick out the ones that appeal to you. I have given the chord positions, but you should be able to work these out for yourself and you should attempt to do so even with these exercises. The approach should be as outlined above:

play the melody with the right hand;
play the chords with the left hand;
play left and right hand together—playing the chords with the left hand only once in each bar;
play left and right hands together—playing the chords with the left hand as many times in each bar as seems appropriate;
when you have played any of these songs in the straightforward way of melody with the right hand and chords with the left hand, vary this so that you play only the root of the chord with the left hand and add notes from the chords to the melody line played with the right hand. The notes added should be below the melody note and as close as possible to it. For example, for "Hey Jude":

Example:
 
The combinations are endless and in the last analysis purely a question of personal preference. Ask yourself the questions: 
What does it sound like? 
Does it feel "right"? 
Is the sound full enough, or could more notes be added in the left or right hands? etc.
and make adjustments accordingly. Inevitably, you will make comparisons with versions of the song you have heard elsewhere. It may not be possible to capture, say, the sound created on record using electronic equipment, but the chord approach gives sufficient flexibility to arrive at a version which you will be content to play.
In all songs, it helps if you sing along with the piano and that in turn means that it is not so necessary to play the melody on the piano, and your hands are liberated to further experiment with sounds.

Exercise 11.1:
 

Exercise 11.2:
 

Exercise 11.3:
 

Exercise 11.4:
 

Exercise 11.5:
 

Exercise 11.6: 
 

SUMMARY
With a knowledge of basic and further chords, music that has chord symbols can be played using chords. With a little practice you will be able to play, with both hands, the tunes and songs that you like, in your own style.
Buy music that has chord symbols, then use the approach contained in this lesson: play the melody with the right hand and the chords with the left hand; then experiment with the mixture adding to, or subtracting from, the notes played with either hand until it sounds right to you.
In time you will be able to play the chords automatically and the melody with left and/or right hands as appropriate.

DAY 12
Playing Chords by Ear; Jazz
INTRODUCTION
Playing by ear is really the ability to pick out a tune and surround it by chords.
Jazz, in its less way-out forms, is improvising to a given chord sequence in the mood that the known tune has created or the pianist wishes to express.
In both, the most commonly used chords have a certain relationship with each other, whatever the key, and these will be briefly discussed here.

A REVIEW OF COMMON CHORDS
Major chords
It has been seen that in any key the most used chords are the fundamental chords of the I, IV, and V notes of the scale.
In the key of C, these are C, F, and G;
In the key of F, these are F, Bb, and C;
In the key of Eb, they are Eb, Ab, and Bb,
with added notes or amendments as appropriate.

Relative minors
These are the minor chords that complement in sound particular major chords.
The relative minor chord of a major chord is to be found a minor third (4 half steps inclusive) down from the root note of the major chord.
Thus the relative minor of C major is A minor:
 
In other words, take A major, lower the third for A minor. The interval between A and C natural (the lowered third) is a minor third. The root note of a major chord is the lowered third note of its relative minor chord.

From other majors the relative minors would be:
 
Relative minors have the same key signatures as their majors do.

II minor chords
In any key, it is also common to find that music written in that key uses, besides relative minor chords, the minor chord formed on the second note of the major scale of that key.
Thus in C, D minor (the minor chord formed on the second note, D, of the major scale of C) would be likely to appear as well as the fundamental chords C, F, and G (the I, IV, and V) and the relative minor A minor.

The Transposing chart will help you to work out the relative and II minors, in any key, that correspond to those shown above.

CHORD PROGRESSIONS
You will have played the progression, for example, between C, F, and G major chords as in 12 bar blues, but now play the following chords and note their relationship in sound:
 
and transpose and play in different keys

Now play the following chords—as above, but with the different chords marked:
 
and transpose and play in different keys

Playing each block of four or five chords as above demonstrates that the chords sound "right" with each other and you will readily appreciate that they could appear together in the same piece of music.
Many songs revolve round these four or five chords, which can of course be played in any sequence; "Blowin' In The Wind," "Blue Moon," etc. The list is endless and you will be able to add to it with ease. The examples and exercises 17.1-6: demonstrate this. Another common chord progression, especially in current songs, is from a minor to a major, as in:
 
The progression is from the minor chord to the major chord a fourth up from the root note of the minor chord.

It is also important to remember that this progression can be used even with other notes being added to the minor and major chords involved. The examples below illustrate this point and also how chords can be used in their inverted positions to give a smoother transition, not only in fingering, but also in sound.
 

This progression is very commonly used in many popular songs, in the songs used in Exercise 17, and, for example, in this extract from "Autumn Leaves"
 

PLAYING BY EAR
This should be your approach to songs or tunes that you attempt to play by ear:
First play the melody line with the right hand and try to identify the key, for example, by singing the final note of the piece (or otherwise determining the "resting place" of the piece) and then playing that note on the piano, as this will give you the keynote. If you are not so familiar with the chords in the key that you have hit on, raise or lower the melody line until it is in a key you are happy with.
Then, put chords to the melody line by trying chords with the left hand. Think first of the fundamental chords: the I, IV, and V, and the basic chords on those notes; and then try the relative and II minors. Work on the principle that the melody note is one of the notes that makes up the chord. A few chords will seem to fit, but select the one that sounds the best. You may have to try many chords—majors, minors, diminished, augmented, major sevenths, sevenths, etc., until you find the right one. The tune itself will dictate when to change chords.
NOTE Don't be thrown off course if you have difficulty with finding the key and the chords—this will take a few attempts at first but should get easier. You may find a key that you are happiest in both with regard to the tune (or perhaps a comfortable singing range) and the chords. Noel Coward, I believe, was happiest in the key of A flat!
Now add notes from the chosen chords to the right hand and experiment with right and left hand notes and rhythm until you get the piece to sound "right."

As your dexterity increases and you get more practice in putting chords to tunes, it will become easier to pick up and play tunes by ear. In this way, it will be possible to learn songs, etc., from radio or records. One difficulty that might be encountered here is that unless your piano is at concert pitch, playing along with the record might present some problems.
With these various chords and their relationships in mind, we can now try to work out a simple tune and put chords to it using the approach outlined above. The example used here is chosen because it is probably a tune that most people know, but the approach is the same for any piece of music that you wish to play by ear.

Example:
With the right hand try to play the tune of"She'll Be Comin' 'Round the Mountain." Try to do this at this point, without looking at the music written out for it, but so that we remain in the same key—you can check later on how you are doing from the music. Start the tune on the note G above middle C as the first note of the tune.
While playing it, you will have realized that in the melody you play, there are no sharps or flats and the final note, and natural "resting place" of the piece is the note of C—this means in this instance that we are in the key of C.
Immediately, you should think of the fundamental or "primary" major chords made of notes from the scale of C major: in other words, I, IV, and V chords of C, F, and G. The other chords of A minor (the relative minor) and D minor (the minor based on the second note of the scale) should also come to mind. If the tune had been picked out in another key, the corresponding chords in that key should spring to mind.
Now with the left hand, try putting the fundamental chords to the tune—with the principle that the melody note being played is one of the three notes (the first, third, or fifth) of a chord.
So the first main note here is C—a note appearing in the chords of C, F, and A minor; try them all—but fairly obviously the one that fits is C itself. Move in this way through the piece, choosing the relevant chords by reference to their notes and the melody note, and selecting the one that gives the required sound. Do not attempt to put chords under too many notes because the chord changes in this piece are not frequent. Test your result with the written version of the tune and chords as shown opposite.
Try to play this as rhythmically as possible. At first, with the right hand playing only the melody line and the left hand the chords. Now add notes from the chords to the right hand, below the melody line, and play single notes or chords with the left hand. Vary the mixture until you are satisfied with the sound.
 

JAZZ OR IMPROVISING
Familiarity with chords and their uses outlined in this and preceding lessons will form a springboard into jazz and improvising. This section briefly outlines the basic approach to adopt.
What is important to bear in mind is the sequence of chords of the tune/song. Your approach to improvising around or jazzing up a melody should be to play the piece—tune and chords—fairly straight at first, as written or as worked out by ear, to become familiar with the sequence of chords: the order in which they are played and when the changes occur. The examples in exercise 17, can be used as bases for improvisation of the few bars of melody given.
Then, playing the same sequence of chords, say in the left hand, you should try with the right hand to take odd notes from the melody line and run into other notes from the chords being played. Bear in mind, for sharps and flats and the notes affected, the key that the piece is in. However, do not be too strict, for after all this is improvisation. With the right hand, play notes above or below the melody line and use the range of the keyboard fully. Playing chords, inverted as needs be, can often be effective for the right hand.
At all times the sequence of chords should be kept in mind and the notes that make up those chords should be kept foremost. You should try to use chords to "back" your own singing of the song or another instrument, and then, after the first time through, jazz the tune up by taking notes from the melody line and running into notes from the chords, or adding notes in between notes of the melody.
In time, dexterity will increase and so will your ability to improvise around a given chord sequence. You may be able then to devise your own chord sequences and improvisations.
Try to use 12 bar blues as much as possible: the chord sequence is fairly easy to remember and free improvisation can be practiced. For example, try this extract from "Dippermouth Blues” as a basis for improvisation, by playing it at first as it is written and then using the chords so as to support a free-ranging right hand.
 
It can be seen and heard in the melody of "Dippermouth Blues” that it contains lowered thirds and sevenths. These are the "blue" notes that give blues melodies and improvisations their distinctive sound. (Bebop musicians also introduced the lowered fifth and this then became a "blue" note).
The blues have been a constant source of inspiration and the 12 bar blues structure has been used throughout the history of jazz, because it is so fundamental and flexible a form. However, any chord progression, be it from a popular song or that of an own composition can be used as a basis for improvisation.

SUMMARY
I have reviewed the most common chords: the three chord trick (I, IV, and V chords), the relative and related minors, and outlined their relationship.
Certain chord progressions in addition to 12 bar blues have been illustrated.
The way of putting chords to a tune has been outlined and improvising has been shown to be basically a process of keeping to a chord sequence but extemporizing around those chords in and around the known melody.

This has sought only to introduce the potential of chords and give a system for playing them and hints on applying them. Your own enthusiasm, style, the example of others (from records or concerts) and practice by yourself or with others, will help you to develop as a pianist who plays the piano by chords, especially in the area of improvisation.

My object has been to:
give a system for working out and playing chords;
suggest an easy way of playing from music using chord symbols;
give an introduction to playing by ear and improvising, showing how chords are the basis for both;
make the piano more approachable and comprehensible as a means of musical expression;
show the importance of thinking in chords and playing by chords.

 
